what was the hardest thing to adjust to
when you first came into this prison
I've always naively I guess thought that
women were the gentler sex that the
weaker sex that's what society wants us
to believe and the fact that women can
stab a man to death 40 times I find that
incomprehensible
south of Chicago in the state of Indiana
to prisons hold some of America's most
dangerous female criminals the Rockville
Correctional Facility and Indiana
women's prison house over 1,800
offenders many are serving long
sentences for extremely violent crimes
some will end there Daisy how severely
was the victim hurt the bullet came into
close contact with his eye and in the
face yes for four weeks I was given
access to a world and the culture the
like of which I've never known so you
were cast as a baby killer I was that I
am that and a lot more than that as well
but that's who I am
America imprisons more women than
anywhere else in the world
[Music]
this is Indiana women's prison my escort
sergeant McPherson is taking me to meet
the most notorious inmate in the state a
convicted double murder thank you you're
welcome
and Sergeant we are heading now to to
the administrative segregation unit this
unit is where our disciplinary offenders
are this is a what you call like a
punishment forum if we put them here
to give them time to think about what
they've done and to clear up their
negative behavior offenders in this unit
spent more than 20 hours a day locked in
their cells they have no contact with
the rest of the prison population hey
Sarah Sarah Pender has been in this
segregation unit for nearly five years
this is punishment not for the double
murder for which she was convicted but
for an incident in 2008 which made
headline news across the country why do
you think they have given you this long
sentence as it were in segregation unit
because I embarrassed them how did you
embarrass them
well I escaped from what was supposed to
be a maximum-security prison how did you
do that
an officer aided me in what way I
embarrass him
he drove me out they have these
transportation bands that come in to get
fuel they have like their own little gas
station and we planned it so that when
he came in to get fuel then I came out
and got in a van how did you manage to
persuade an officer well I didn't
actually take to take you up I didn't
actually ask him yeah I know
it's uh I was having when I was planning
my escape I plan on doing it by myself
and but I needed money and I didn't want
to ask my family because I would have to
lie to them about what it was for so in
order to make money I worked with this
officer who had trafficking contraband
and then my friends would sell it for
money and then I would get the money to
save up for my escape and so he was
making a lot of money because I was
paying him very well to do this and he
found out that I was playing an escape
and saw an opportunity to make more
money and so he said what if I could
just roll you out of here that would be
worth my while
and and as a side note I also had a
sexual relationship with the officer and
that came out when I when I escaped and
that was very embarrassing to the
department I think I'm beginning to
understand why the authorities have
taken such a strong line on your case
because you mentioned it was an
embarrassment I think it's a huge
embarrassment for them yes I and the
only explanation that they've given my
mother for why I am in here is that I'm
quote too smart for their facility this
is the Rockville Correctional Facility
from which Sarah Pender escaped in 2008
she was on the run for more than four
months and was labeled America's most
wanted woman leading the way back to
Indiana two state troopers in an
unmarked police car bring a convicted
murderer and prison escapee Sarah Jo
Pender back to an Indiana state prison
Pender has been on the run from police
since escaping from the Rockville
Correctional Facility last August she'll
have no contact with the outside she no
phone calls no visits and will minimize
her contact or even with staff
internally the state has been true to
its word and this has been Sarah
Pender's life ever since Scott stickler
the officer who helped her escape was
jailed for seven years
sergeant McPherson has known Sarah
Pender from the day she arrived that
Indiana women's prison
she must have struck up a very deep
relationship having targeted that male
officer he was having problems at home
and she preyed on that she preyed on his
emotions she made him feel that she was
gonna save him that she would be his
everything that she would replace what
he didn't have and he was so vulnerable
he fell for it so he did whatever she
asked he fell in love with her he fell
in love with her yes but of course she
wasn't in love with him she used him to
get what she wanted and that was to get
out of Rockville and you would put that
down to her ability to she is I've seen
a lot I've been here for over 20 years
Sarah is one of the best manipulators
I've seen
[Music]
out in the general population prisoners
must conform to strictly regimented days
three hours for recreation
[Music]
fifteen minute sittings for meals
me
apart from this routine inmates are
allowed out of their cells although they
are confined to their assigned units
thank you
this is unit 13 offenders have just
returned from lunch
what are you doing here today I'm just
talking she's doing a little crafting or
writing some cards you're sending cards
up Mother's Day cards it's coming up so
we got to get him out yeah
does your mother come to see you here um
no my mother she lives out of state so
she really doesn't come up here much
she's never come to see you at all and
how long have you been in this prison um
since 2006 yes well it's a long time not
only for you but for anybody strong-arm
robbery trip yeah that's more for like
physical robbery like I didn't have a
gun or anything I was fighting punchy
you know that kind of stuff what were
you robbing Oh people sorry
it was three people what was this in the
street yeah we were driving around we
thought when we seen people walking we
hopped out the car bum-rushed him kind
of beat him up knock him down try to
smash the person so you robbed three
people yeah how much did you take oh it
was only 300 hours from that robbery
so really wasn't nothing a stupid
decision not worth anything especially
all these years of my life when you say
from that robbery you suggest that there
were other instances how old were you
when you started on this may I call it a
career well since I was about 13 school
um I went to school up until like 10th
grade then I started fighting getting
expelled and I just stopped going
I'm actually really smart in school I
always had straight A's but I just
couldn't stay there always
in getting out why could you stay there
why did you find the need to fight well
I just have a really horrible anger
problem so I always let that get the
best of me even looking at you now I'm
finding it difficult to believe that you
are capable of having done that I'm very
much capable of it because you're still
very young yeah I'm 25 and your sentence
was 16 years to 8 if you behave well
yeah if you control your anger right and
actually probably in their most recent
year I can say I think getting control
of my anger and I have two kids so I
know I have to go to kids yes how old
today there are seven and nine two
little girls do you feel you have let
them down by not being there for them
yes and I deal with that every day and I
really like my biggest motivation to
changing and being different and coming
out of here and you know taking
something from it not just oh I've been
in prison you know I want to walk out of
here and be something for them I just do
not want them to follow this theme
circle like my mother was in prison you
know this is the same what full
attempted murder and aggravated robbery
said that that was not perhaps a great
start for you in your life was that's
kind of what you know kicked everything
off it's mama leaving
[Music]
Eddie hearts will be free in only a few
months she'll spend much longer picking
up the threads of her life
[Music]
I'm on my way to the Rockville
Correctional Facility
[Music]
this is the largest women's prison in
the state of Indiana
I still need Boeing Joe
[Music]
Rockville is a clearinghouse for
convicts from all over the state
some will serve all their time here
others are assessed and moved on to
other prisons
every month on average 200 new offenders
arrived this is their first port of call
from now on their every action will be
governed by prison rules any sexual
contact of any kind between you and
staff and your offenders do our stuff go
over there and get a Styrofoam cup put
your name on it there's water in the
orange thing from the way an intake
looks when she comes in here can you
tell what she might be in for no I don't
ever try to guess some of them when you
look at him and you look at the offender
it's like you cannot believe that that's
what she's here for
you'll frequently surprised by well
we've done very much so yeah you would
if you look at you know the paper and
then look at her and you're going
there's no way that yep do you see many
of the same people coming and going yes
they'll come in that door back there and
say I'm home and I'm going really you
know because for some of them this is
because they have nowhere else to go
okay I'm gonna roll each finger and
we'll start with your right thumb
hello I'm Trevor have you been in this
prison before yes I have for a Fort
Wayne Fort Wayne Indiana I've been here
for possession of meth so I've been here
before but I always stayed like an
intake
I didn't leave intake so but this time I
will yeah so this time you will be in
the general prison population what what
sort of prospect is that for you um a
little scary but at the same time like
don't teach me little morals you know
teach me not to come back do you have a
drug dependency um I've been to rehab
again I'm an addict straight up so yeah
I do how long have you been an addict um
since I was 17 I'm 28 long time do you
have children
I do have four um fortune I for my
oldest one is 13 I've at 13 year old 12
year old nine year old into six year old
I'm trying to find a hopeful road out do
this for you what's that I don't know I
had to have a game plan when I leave
here I know that like going back to life
like when I got in trouble this time I
violated probation because I didn't have
no transportation back and forth and I
wasn't using and I haven't used for
maybe three months at the most you know
and that's pretty good for me because I
was doing needles and all kind of stuff
but three months is a big step and I
just wanted it a little bit further and
a little bit further but it's just it's
hard it's really hard
thank you very much for talking to me
good luck
new inmates have a month of prison
orientation they are easily recognized
by their orange uniform
[Music]
for every new arrival some other
prisoner is about to leave
[Music]
ma the search is quietly counting down
the dense
[Music]
I caught up with her on her mail
delivery round Martha how long have you
been in almost 20 years the thought of
getting out must be a exhilarating one
yes but you must also be worried about
getting back into the world after all
this time yeah I am but um this time has
given me time to discover things I
didn't have before like patience and um
I know it's gonna be hard it's gonna be
a little bit difficult but I just take
one day at a time and I'm just anxious
to see how the world is changed in that
20 years you never left to catch up on
yes I have a lot to catch up on and I
have two daughters grown that were ages
almost 13 and 16 when I was incarcerated
who are now 32 and 35 so I haven't seen
them in a while have you seen any of
them since you've been here I haven't
seen my youngest daughter since 99 she
couldn't do it no more and my oldest I
stopped coming in 2005 because she
didn't want to leave without me anymore
you missed quite a lot I just went from
here to Terre Haute to the hospital not
long ago and I was awestruck at the
things I saw and I had had the officer
tell me what it was because I didn't I
didn't know what it was things things
like what I seen this little gadget once
and I didn't know what it was someone
said was an iPod so I had to have him
explain to me what an iPod was cause I
don't know and a cell phone I'm used to
your course phones at home so but I was
I'm like yeah I can't wake you out and
try these things I'm I'm what type of
person likes to learn things and I'm
curious and I'm gonna find out then
we'll get on Google I found out all
about Google and I know them I just
can't wait I just can't wait to explore
everything so you waiting to make your
entry back into the real world yes and
I've told my children that you might
still see a little prison in me because
I've been down so long you know there
might be this what does that mean there
might be just one time when I look at
the clock and think it's count time or
not sure if I should answer the
telephone and money's gonna be strange
to my hands you know and so I said if I
act a little
different or if I wonder offer an hour
to don't worry about mom I'm exploring
have you thought what your first night
of freedom would be like when you can
sleep in the bed of your own I feel it
might show me how a little bit of heaven
would feel that's how I think of it is a
little bit of heaven you know in a dome
surrounded by other people heaven heaven
for 20 years
Martha search has been told what to do
and when all those decisions will soon
be hers alone
prison inmates and long sentences
survived partly on dreams of freedom but
in August 2008 one female offender Sarah
Pender actually broke out of Rockville
the convicted double murderer but
earlier told me that her escape plan
relied on the help of officers Scott
Spitler now since September we've been
hot on the trail of a woman authorities
have called a female Charles Manson now
recently she was added to the US
Marshals 15 most wanted list making her
the most wanted woman in America but how
on earth did the authorities explain the
fact that she escaped lieutenant Brad
Gray was on duty on the day of the
breakout
lieutenant gray what were your
impressions of Sarah Pender while she
was here she was always trying to get
get an advantage over someone or
something it was always about anytime
you talk to her if you ask her a
question she would typically respond
with what's in it for me and when people
you know either say that or give you the
impression that that's what they're
trying to do then then it should put you
on notice that you know you have to be
careful about how you're dealing with
them
[Music]
she got out through a back door
in this recreation building having
changed into casual clothes she hid her
prison uniform in the ceiling the door
alarms failed to go off and a white van
was waiting with panda crouching under
the backseat Spitler gopher out of the
West Gate and out onto the open road
what were your feelings about the fact
that this was an officer with whom you
would work very closely someone you knew
someone you had served with and someone
you respected as a as a colleague once
we discovered that it was him that that
had driven Pender out of the facility I
was just absolutely sick just sick to my
stomach
physically sick mentally sick over the
entire episode Sarah Pender proved to be
as you had probably thought but when she
came in here that she was just as Trevor
and manipulators you had originally felt
oh absolutely she's she proven hers has
proven herself to be that time and time
again and that is probably the the best
proof of it right then and there if you
can convince an officer someone who was
trained not to do that somebody who was
trained to maintain the order and the
peace of a facility if you can convince
that person to drive you out of a
Correctional Facility you can convince
anybody to do anything
the authorities were bruised by Sarah
pandas escape
she was put in solitary confinement and
has now been here for almost five years
longer than any other female prisoner in
the state
[Laughter]
[Music]
of the 1200 offenders at Rockville
Correctional Facility 85% of them are
mothers
[Music]
I'm on my way to Dom tree to where new
arrivals to the prison our house Thank
You Paula McIntosh a mother of four was
beginning the difficult process of
adjustment Paula what was your first
night like here like going in all the
new girls was it a very talkative dorm
did you get some sleep they let me sleep
they helped me they talked to me a
little bit tell me if I needed any
shampoo or anything yeah yeah a lot of
noise on of echoes you can wake up easy
you know what was the biggest shock to
you
coming into intake when you like yeah
like not really to intake just like when
you drive up in that vehicle and you
turn around and you see that like the
last gate closed it's like your heart
goes instead yeah it's really hard well
you have a visit soon no no my family
won't come up here like my dad like he
doesn't really come and say yes cuz he
just it's just really hard on him so I
don't I'm pretty sure I won't get no
business why would your father come to
see you I think it's too hard on him
because there's me and then my brothers
it just turned 18 he's like that and
it's just like a pattern you know and
it's I think it's really hard on him
it's a behold come save me it's hard on
him but it's also very tough on you that
he wouldn't come to see you yeah he's
got my daughter he's got my 9 year old
right now so you know he's got a lot of
responsibilities on him so I said the I
don't know pretty for him is all I can
do your daughter is nine at that age
she's able to understand the great deal
I wonder what your what your father said
to her or says to her about your
situation like that before
my daughters Melissa and she's like
she's really strong and she knows
everything I don't lie to her I told her
she knows about my drug use she knows
about my she knows everything
I called her this time told I was going
to prison she's like just keep your head
up
gosh that's a pretty tearing to be told
by your nine-year-old daughter to keep
your head up and but even for you to
make a call to since you're going to
prison
and you have no idea when you'll see her
again no um her dad just got out of
prison and he's not seen her not one
time and um she's nine and I guess he's
just like coming around my dad's letting
him come and see her like visits so
that's like a big step for her to when
is this it then it's like I'm there and
then I'm gone you know well I hope your
time passes here very quickly and I hope
that you get a chance to be reunited
with your daughter and your family thank
you very much for talking to me thank
you
[Music]
at Indiana women's prison
it's morning recreation it's a chance
for inmates to make friends and
cultivate relationships which can be a
desperately important part of prison
life
[Music]
the most troublesome offenders have few
opportunities to do that they are
confined to this segregation unit they
have one hour out of their cells under
escorted Shaklee even to go for a shower
[Music]
Sarah Pender cell faces that of a friend
armed bank robber Desiree Hancock I
noticed your opposite Sarah Pender yes I
loved her that's one of my very good
friends very good friend she I would
like to give her a lot of credit for
partly the woman that I am today like
when I get ready to show out or I'll get
ready to snap coz this place will take
you there she'll be like doesn't rain
shut up or shut up go sit down and I'll
go sit down I'll calm down in a place
like this friend is not a word that you
just throwing it's not something that
you just say because women are very
vindictive creatures and they're very
fake and they're very just caddy they
were smiling your face and they'd just
be like hey and I just hope nothing but
the best for you and then you turn
around and even blue slipped you like
thirty five times they're trying to get
you in your girlfriend separated how
close do these relationships get you
mentioned women and her girlfriend
that's a it's a pretty pretty pretty
pretty deep thank you pretty deep a lot
of women don't come in here gay I wasn't
when I came to prison but I am now and
oh you are you have become accessing gay
yes I'm a lesbian uh-huh yes I am but
you you discovered that or you became
that when you here when you came to this
years before I came to president oh man
okay
it's just I don't know loneliness is
what started it and then I don't know
one thing led to another and it may seem
fake on outside but emotions and
feelings are real and you have had such
a deep relationship in this to two great
loves I've had a dozen relationships but
I had two great loves and I had in this
prison and I will say that I damaged
both of them i damaged both of them how
did you do that how did you down a chile
vina cheater a liar just it was like
being at you tomorrow like when you're
in a relationship it's like being a kid
in a candy store it's not just in one
room guess it's not one girl is 740
girdles so a now - 740 probably only 40
ain't gay
mmm the rest them this is the gayest
place on earth the rest of them are all
gay
it's lunchtime on unit 13
inmates follow a well marked out route
to the food hall
[Music]
I meet up again with Eddie Hawks who is
hoping very soon to leave this place for
good
come I'll have to grab one of these
what's what's on the menu today this is
a chicken patty with gravy what is this
a chicken patty ok gravy this is
supposed to be cabbage and this is some
kind of Spanish rice Spanish rice
something that's really not bad I'm
bashing the food but sometimes it really
isn't that bad like I'm gonna eat this
that's right a bit
hey guys ready to say great ok dear Lord
we come to you thank you for this meal
we ask that you bless and let it be a
nourishment to our bodies and your
precious thing we pray and thank you
aiming the gravy's to watering still
made it really soggy the other thing is
about this place which is very obvious
is that this is an all-female
environment which you had to get used to
right
and that's kind of funny because on the
streets I never really hung around
females but there's people here that I
mean I'm close with Queenie's one of
them mrs. crusher we're close not like
sisters but you know just close people
that you you bond with and have fun wins
yes ok we all have a common bond
no matter your current we all have a
common bond like it's we could see
someone like of course I'm having a bad
day or a D having a bad day and she
crying you know this is a no touch
facility I'm opposed to be hugging but
we do like women needs to the comfort of
hey it's gonna be alright
and if you can tell me all day but if
you touch me and let me know it's gonna
be all right is everything on the
surface so are there deeper
relationships of that in here yeah
plenty of but I try not to
I've been involved with me for
relationships in here and it just didn't
really go well so I just try not so you
were you say mm-hmm it didn't go well
no and I make you feel like it's going
well while it's going but one since
they're like out of sight they go home
or something it never goes as planned
like all the words they've said it
doesn't add up now you're looking
forward to being out in a few months but
what what are the fears what other
worries about this world that you're
going into after six seven eight years
well what concerns you really just the
fact of being put back in the same
environment the same surroundings you
know in making the other choice not the
negative choice so you're looking at the
cabbage you can have my cabbages capice
so you'll have two cabbages to death
right you'll take the chicken patty
I sure will I think I'm glad my presence
here is serving some purpose so you left
me you've left me bread and rice thank
you very much this how it works around
here will you will you miss that he
would you miss yes I to me she's a
youngster so I think it's my job to put
some meat on her brain me put a little
knowledge on her so she won't come back
here this is not where you want to be I
keep her grounded like if she's mad I'm
like okay addy let's talk do you think
that she's going to stay out of trouble
I think so I think she got it right she
has babies
great go home it kind of keeps me really
motive and that's the big punch of you
two is that you have your life back with
your with your children the biggest
thing I just can't wait they deserve so
much more you know like this has been my
life and this is my parents life and
this was their parents life and I'm just
so ready to break that curse that cycle
the prison officers I spoke to will
optimistic that once she's released
Eddie hearts stands a good chance of
keeping out of trouble
[Music]
at the end of my first visit I asked to
see the convicted double murderer Sarah
Pender again
hi Sara
once described is America's most wanted
woman her notoriety is a far cry from
her formative years and life as a
college student
[Music]
all that change in the year 2000 Penda
was charged with the murder of a couple
with whom she shared a house
they were actually shocked by her
boyfriend Richard hull but the
prosecution believed that Sarah Pender
was instrumental in planning the murder
she bought the murder weapon
[Music]
and she helped to dispose of the bodies
in this skip
she has a charles manson like ability to
manipulate people to act as surrogates
for and committing crimes the evidence
was overwhelming that if she didn't pull
the trigger she did everything else
Penda has always admitted helping to get
rid of the bodies
but she strenuously denies masterminding
the killings but she failed to convince
the jury Pender was found guilty of
double murder I kept hoping to get to
the bottom of the Sarah Pender story
okay the thing that I have always got
from the conversations we've had before
is that you are not typical of the
people in this prison environment
generally would you agree I would I
would I am I have a wider worldview and
I think that I've been able to glean
more wisdom than the typical person I'm
generally more educated I have thought I
have five years of college why did you
choose the path that ended you up here
it was an emotional attachment to
someone who when I found out that he
dealt drugs that I accepted it because I
didn't want to lose him so at every
stage you were aware of where that
codependency was taking you yes I went
into the relationship with my eyes open
however I was very very naive and I
never thought that it would bring harm
to me or anyone that I loved and like
most women I thought that I could change
him and I asked him to stop selling
drugs and to get a real job and he
agreed
and that was the path that I thought we
were going on it they tell you aware
that there were guns in the house or a
gun in the house yeah I bought the gun
it was my gun I he asked me to buy em a
gun if someone asked me to buy a gun my
first question would be a why me why are
you asking me to do it and what are you
going to use it for
did you ask those questions yeah and he
told me that I was the only person who
was who didn't have a criminal
background because in Bethan itself is
awfully suspicious what you can't in
America you can't buy a firearm legally
if you have a felony and so I was the
only person who was legally able to buy
it but I earn but I'm talking about the
fact that you were being asked by a gun
by a felon
the thought of being left alone
frightened me more than whatever
consequences would come from purchasing
a firearm what kind of a gun was this it
was a shotgun that you would use for
hunting like I think birds I don't know
I didn't pick it out but but in the end
it was not used for hunting birds it was
used for shooting to people with whom he
was in his disagreement yeah well he
actually had no disagreement with a
woman he said he shot her just because
she was a witness the bear fact of the
matter is that you purchased a gun which
was used in the killing of two people
did you think about the victims of the
people who were killed in this in this
crime nothing more about their families
the woman had three kids
Patricia's she had three children and
despite the fact that they were both
felons drug dealers doesn't matter if
they were still people and they have
families that love them just like I have
family that loves me and they can't ever
get those people back what did you think
when you heard the judge of the
prosecutor pronounce the sentence on you
because you were give him a very long to
very long sentences yes I was given 110
years 110 years
what were your emotions on hearing that
dreadful sentence disbelief why did the
jury in the end conclude that you were
directly involved in the murder of two
people
I knew that I had I knew that I had
committed a crime but I knew I wasn't
guilty of murder and and I was willing
to take responsibility for my actions in
that case it was was it in somebody's
mind the mind of the prosecutors the
prosecuting authorities that you had
somehow encouraged or manipulated him
into doing into into committing those
murders yes yes that was their theory
that I had that I had this is where the
entire or the entire reputation of
manipulation that I'm a manipulator came
from the prosecutor had went forward on
the theory that I had manipulated
Richard into murdering murdering the
victims and his theory was that I wanted
them out of my house you are being
judged or you as seen you are perceived
as a two-faced manipulator yeah yeah
which is really hard label to carry
every time I meet somebody new if they
are aware of my infamous reputation it's
a new hurdle to jump and that's a
consequence of my actions
[Music]
next week I talked to a woman who took
the life of her three-month-old son so
you were cast as a baby killer I was
that I am that I'm a lot more than that
as well but that's who I am
I meet newborns Aidan what would you
tell your son when he is old enough
about where he was born in the
circumstances in which he was born I
would just tell him that Mommy made a
big mistake and hopefully he didn't
won't ever come to a place like this
and I speak to a murderer who managed to
stay on the run for 35 years I heard
something coming in the back door and I
thought oh no it's the cops
[Music]